What's new 0.6.0 (#196)
amber-lang/amber-docs: docs/nightly-alpha/getting_started/whats_new.md

# Recursive Functions

Amber now supports recursive functions, allowing a function to call itself. Local variables inside recursive functions are automatically compiled as `local` in Bash to prevent namespace pollution between recursive calls.

```ab
fun factorial(n: Int): Int {
    if n <= 1 {
        return 1
    }
    return n * factorial(n - 1)
}

echo(factorial(5)) // Outputs: 120
```

# Testing suite

You can also name your tests for better readability and filter them by name or filename using CLI arguments. Read more in the [Testing Guide](testing).

# Public Variables

Variables can now be exported from a module using the `pub` keyword, making them importable in other files — just like functions. This enables sharing configuration values, constants, and other data across multiple Amber files without duplicating definitions.

```ab
// config.ab
pub const VERSION = "1.0"
pub const WORKING_DIR = "."
```

```ab
// main.ab
import { VERSION, WORKING_DIR } from "config.ab"

> echo(VERSION)       // Outputs: 1.0

Reviewer: Add information about same scope var/const redeclaration

echo(WORKING_DIR)   // Outputs: .
```

## New builtins

Amber has gained many new builtins for common shell operations. These builtins generate valid, shellcheck-compatible Bash code and integrate with Amber's error handling system.

### `touch` — Create or update files

Creates empty files or updates the modification timestamp of existing files. Accepts one or more file paths.

```ab
touch("newfile.txt")

> touch("/tmp/a.txt", "/tmp/b.txt")

Reviewer: This is invalid syntax, as far as I can see. Touch accepts only one argument

Author: ops

```

### `rm` — Remove files or directories

Removes files or directories from the filesystem. This is a failable builtin — use `failed` blocks or `trust` to handle errors.

```ab

> rm("oldfile.txt")

Reviewer: We also require failure handlers, so I think we should include at least `?` in this example

> rm("-r", "/tmp/olddir")  // Recursive removal

Reviewer: also invalid. We accept flags as the second and third bool parameter

```

### `sleep` — Pause execution

Pauses script execution for the specified number of seconds. Supports decimal values for sub-second delays.

```ab
sleep(5)   // Wait 5 seconds
sleep(0.5) // Wait half a second
```

### `ls` — List directory contents

Returns an array of filenames in the specified directory. Accepts optional `all` and `recursive` boolean parameters. This is a failable expression — it returns `[Text]`.

```ab
let files = trust ls("/tmp")

let all_files = trust ls("/tmp", true, false)         // Include hidden files
let recursive = trust ls("/tmp", false, true)         // List recursively
let everything = trust ls("/tmp", true, true)         // Both
```

### `pwd` — Print working directory

Returns the current working directory as a `Text` value.

```ab
let dir = pwd()
echo("Current directory: {dir}")
```

### `clear` — Clear the terminal

Clears the terminal screen. Takes no parameters.

```ab
clear()
```

### `cp` — Copy files or directories

Copies files or directories from one location to another. This is a failable builtin.

```ab
cp("source.txt", "backup.txt")

> cp("-r", "src_dir", "dest_dir")  // Recursive copy

Reviewer: same here

```

### `pid` — Get process ID

Returns the PID (Process ID) of the last background process executed. Useful for process management.

```ab
let last_pid = pid()
echo("Last process: {last_pid}")
```

### `disown` — Remove background jobs

Removes a job from the shell's active job table, allowing the script to continue without waiting for it. Can optionally accept a specific PID.

```ab
disown()      // Disown the most recent background job

> disown(1234)  // Disown a specific PID

Reviewer: Disown doesn't take any arguments. And I can see we don't have tests for this builtin. We need to fix that

```

# Shell targets: Bash 3.2, Zsh, and Ksh

Amber now supports generating scripts for multiple shell targets. This is controlled via the `--target` flag during compilation:

```sh

> $ amber build script.ab output.sh              # Default: Bash 3.2

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
$ amber build script.ab output.sh              # Default: Bash 4.3
```

$ amber build --target bash script.ab output.sh
$ amber build --target zsh script.ab output.zsh
$ amber build --target ksh script.ab output.ksh
```

> **Bash 3.2 as the default target** — By default, Amber now generates scripts compatible with Bash 3.2. This is significant because macOS still ships with Bash 3.2 (due to licensing reasons), meaning scripts compiled with Amber work out of the box on macOS, Linux, and older systems without requiring a Bash upgrade. The generated code avoids features introduced in Bash 4+, such as associative arrays or certain parameter expansions.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
**Bash 4.3 as the default target** — By default, Amber now generates scripts compatible with Bash 4.3. This is a significant change for future features like objects and custom structures and other useful features coming with bash 4+. We still keep support for bash 3.2 in a form of shell target `bash-3.2` to keep support for legacy OS X systems which only came with bash 3.2. Note that the bash 3.2 target will avoid future features like objects due to lack of functionality in older bash versions.
```

**Zsh support** — Scripts can be compiled to run under Zsh, which is the default shell on macOS. This enables better integration with Zsh-specific environments.

**Ksh support** — Ksh (KornShell) support is also available, extending Amber's reach to systems where Ksh is the primary shell, such as some enterprise Unix environments.

# Performance improvements

The Amber standard library has been optimized for better performance in the generated Bash code. Many functions now use more efficient shell constructs and avoid unnecessary subprocess spawning. Combined with the math improvements below, Amber scripts now run significantly faster, especially in loops and data processing tasks.

# Math improvements

> Mathematical operations in Amber-generated Bash code no longer depend on `bc` or `sed`. Range computations and arithmetic are now handled using native Bash arithmetic, improving performance and reducing external dependencies. This means Amber scripts run faster and require fewer tools installed on the target system.

Reviewer 2: should be removed, since calculation is still done with bc + sed, but with one subshell less, however i'd consider replacing it with awk solution, but that's another topic to be discussed

# Recursive Functions

Amber now supports recursive functions, allowing a function to call itself. Local variables inside recursive functions are automatically compiled as `local` in Bash to prevent namespace pollution between recursive calls.

```ab
fun factorial(n: Int): Int {
    if n <= 1 {
        return 1
    }
    return n * factorial(n - 1)
}

echo(factorial(5)) // Outputs: 120
```

# Testing suite

You can also name your tests for better readability and filter them by name or filename using CLI arguments. Read more in the [Testing Guide](testing).

# Union Types

Amber now supports union types, allowing variables and function parameters to accept multiple types. This enables more flexible APIs while maintaining type safety.

```ab
fun describe(value: Int | Bool | Text) {
    // value can be an Int, Bool, or Text
    echo("Got: {value}")
}

describe(42)        // Works with Int
describe(true)      // Works with Bool
describe("hello")   // Works with Text
```

Union types also work with arrays:

```ab

> let mixed: [Int | Text] = [1, "two", 3, "four"]

Reviewer: It's invalid syntax in every possible way. We don't support `: Type` syntax, and we don't accept values of different types in the same array. This type suggests, that we don't know if the value is of type `[Int]` or if it's of type `[Text]`. Or am I missing something in the code?

Reviewer: All I could "hack away" was this code:

```ab
let arr = [Int | Text]

arr += [1]
arr += ["asd"]

echo(arr)
```

But I believe it's a bug, as this code is invalid:

```ab
let arr = [1, "asd"]
```

Reviewer: I've talked with @Ph0enixKM and this syntax should be invalid. I'll fix it, so that union type in array will be invalid

echo("Current directory: {dir}")
```

### `clear` — Clear the terminal

Clears the terminal screen. Takes no parameters.

```ab
clear()
```

### `cp` — Copy files or directories

Copies files or directories from one location to another. This is a failable builtin.

```ab
cp("source.txt", "backup.txt")?
cp("src_dir", "dest_dir", true)?  // Recursive copy
```

### `pid` — Get process ID

Returns the PID (Process ID) of the last background process executed. Useful for process management.

```ab
let last_pid = pid()
echo("Last process: {last_pid}")
```

### `disown` — Remove background jobs

Removes a job from the shell's active job table, allowing the script to continue without waiting for it. Takes no arguments.

```ab
disown()      // Disown the most recent background job
```

### `lock` — File locking

Creates an exclusive lock on a file, useful for coordinating access between processes.

```ab
lock("/tmp/myapp.lock")?  // Returns when lock is acquired
// Critical section here
```

### `await` — Wait for background processes

Waits for background processes to complete, optionally with a timeout.

```ab
// Start a background process
some_long_task()

// Wait for it to finish

> await()?

Reviewer: Await requiers argument of type `Int | [Int]`

Returns the version of the current shell as a `Text` value.

```ab
let version = shellversion()
echo("Shell version: {version}")
```

# Shell targets: Bash 3.2, Zsh, and Ksh

Amber now supports generating scripts for multiple shell targets. This is controlled via the `--target` flag during compilation:

```sh
amber build script.ab output.sh              # Default: Bash 4.3
amber build --target bash script.ab output.sh
amber build --target zsh script.ab output.zsh
amber build --target ksh script.ab output.ksh
```

**Bash 4.3 as the default target** — By default, Amber now generates scripts compatible with Bash 4.3. This is a significant change for future features like objects and custom structures and other useful features coming with bash 4+. We still keep support for bash 3.2 in a form of shell target `bash-3.2` to keep support for legacy OS X systems which only came with bash 3.2. Note that the bash 3.2 target will avoid future features like objects due to lack of functionality in older bash versions.

**Zsh support** — Scripts can be compiled to run under Zsh, which is the default shell on macOS. This enables better integration with Zsh-specific environments.

> **Ksh support** — Ksh (KornShell) support is also available, extending Amber's reach to systems where Ksh is the primary shell, such as some enterprise Unix environments.

Reviewer: It's not tested, use at your own risk

```ab
rm("oldfile.txt")

> rm("/tmp/olddir", "-r")  // Recursive removal

Reviewer: Second argument is of type `Bool`

```ab
cp("source.txt", "backup.txt")

> cp("src_dir", "dest_dir", "-r")  // Recursive copy

Reviewer: Same here`Bool`, not a text flag
